# Primer on the RRS


**Abbreviations: ** 
AAM: author accepted manuscript
RRS: rights retention strategy; 
VOR: version of record.


# Notes.

## relevant links:

Wellcome Trust guide:

Publishers anti:

Publishers pro: Royal Society? 


# Introduction

**This is written by researchers, for researchers, very much
work-in-progress during 2021.**.

Congratulations!  Your paper has just been accepted for publication in
a journal.  Your excitement may soon fade however when it turns to the
thorny issue of complying with open access policies.  If you are
lucky, your funders may readily pay the article processing charge
(APC).  Or you may have chosen a diamond OA venue where there is no
APC.  But what about if you have chosen to publish in a 'hybrid' venue
and you would like to make your article open access.

What you might wish to do is to share the version of the manuscript
that the journal has been accepted, the so-called "author-accepted
manuscript".  This version is *your* manuscript, taking on board
comments during the review process (editors and reviewers, who are
typically your colleagues).  But many journals demand that you should
not share your own AAM until an embargo period (often 6-24 months) has
passed.  Publishers have imposed these embargo periods as a way to
protect their business model [ref needed].  Given that your paper may
take many months post acceptance to appear in print, being able to
share your AAM immediately allows people immediate access to your
research.

Once a journal has finished turning your manuscript into the final
article by suitable typesetting and reformatting, the 'version of
record' (VOR) is born. Hence your paper is usually at least two
papers: the AAM and the VOR.  Sharing AAMs provides an equitable
approach to open access for your research, as no APC is required.
Furthermore, if your VOR gets locked behind a paywall, the AAM should
be freely available.

So, how can you legally share your AAM immediately upon publication?
There are several approaches to this [refs], of which the latest is
the "Rights Retention Strategy" (RRS), developed by Coalition S.  In
this primer, we describe what the RRS is and its pros and cons.


## What is the RRS?


First, what is it?  It is the following piece of text that you add
prominently to your manuscript before submitting it to a journal.

    For the purpose of Open Access, the author has applied a CC BY
	public copyright licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript (AAM)
	version arising from this submission


This magic sentence alerts the editor to your intention to share your
AAM under a CC BY licence (a permissive licence ...).  This *should*
give you the right to freely share your AAM.


## Examples of it in action...

(Ross has some examples)

Too early to say if it will become the preferred route to OA; e.g. in
the three routes to compliance, Wellcome have stated their preference
for route 1 (not the AAM route).


## Reception



Science magazine has noted that it will allow the RRS to be used on
AAMs submitted by researchers funded by plan S coalition. 
<https://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2021-01/aaft-foa011421.php>

Royal Society and the Microbiology  society are noted to support it
<https://www.coalition-s.org/rights-retention-strategy>.


## What are the advantages for an author?

If it holds water, it offers a way to publish in hybrid journals
without paying an APC.

It signals to the publishing community that retaining copyright..

Much is made by publishers of the "hallowed status" of the
VOR. e.g. it is referred to as "the foundation of the scientific
record" (IOP letter). However, this seems like an outdated idea --
research is not a single PDF.  By contrast, papers can evolve over
time (and DOIs can now be suitablyt versioned).  

"However, VOR did not appear on the eighth day of Creation; it really
is the spin-off of a particular technology, print." Jean-Claude
Gu√©don, in response to post <https://oaspa.org/open-post-the-rise-of-immediate-green-oa-undermines-progress/>


In other areas,
e.g. computing, we have embraced the notion of version control, and
versioning, to allow us to refer to software at different points in
time, rather than a single thing.  Why restrict papers to this notion?
As long as researchers are explicit about which version of a paper
they are citing, there is no problem (ideally if the object being
cited is freely available).  This idea is gradually being adopted in
scholarly communications, e.g. moving away from "version of record" to
"record of versions", which seems a much richer idea.


### notes
<https://oaspa.org/open-post-the-rise-of-immediate-green-oa-undermines-progress/>

"

## What are the disadvantages?

It is simply too early to tell if this RRS provides to have any real
bite in revolutionising scholarly communication.  One concern for an
author is that they may have their paper accepted in principle, only
to find that the publisher demands some embargo on publication of the
AAM as a condition of publishing the paper [tweet]. "Copyright
chicken".

Copyright chicken.  Puts onus on individual; risky strategy?

Many trational publishers have signed a letter objecting to the RRS:
<https://ioppublishing.org/signatories_publish_statement_on_rights_retention_strategy/>

Their fundamental objection seems thto the

## related approaches

UK SCL; MIT rights; Sparc addendum.  Legislation, e.g. France,
Belgium, to allow researchers to share work.


## Will it help us?  will it disappear

Scholarly communications seems like an epic game of chess played out
over decades.  Just as we (academics) think there is some solution,
e.g. the UK Finch report, publishers respond with moves that were
unintended (e.g. witness the rise of hybrid publications, and
escalating APCs).  I doubt the RRS is the silver bullet, but if
nothing else it is a useful tool to raise awareness of scholarly
communication.  Even if you are a well-funded researcher that can
afford high APCs, this system excludes those researchers, particularly
from other countries (the global South, ref?) that cannot affrord such
fees.

In a nutshell, if traditional publishers see the RRS as a threat to
their continued existence, good.  We would rather see equitable OA
practices, such as overlay and diamond OA journals.

# Conclusions


## Acknowledgements

Johan Rooryck; Lisa 



